About the museum : The National Museum, New Delhi, as we see it today, has an interesting beginning. The blueprint for establishing the National Museum in Delhi was prepared by the Maurice Gwyer Committee in May 1946. An Exhibition of Indian Art, consisting of selected artefacts from various museums of India was organized by the Royal Academy, London with the cooperation of Government of India and Britain. The Exhibition went on display in the galleries of Burlington House, London during the winter months of 1947-48. It was decided to display the same collection in Delhi, before the return of exhibits to their respective museums. An exhibition was organized in the the RashtrapatiBhawan (President's residence), New Delhi in 1949, which turned out to be a great success. This event proved responsible for the creation of the National Museum.

The success of this Exhibition led to the idea that advantage should be taken of this magnificent collection to build up the nucleus collection of the National Museum. State Governments, Museum authorities and private donors, who had participated in the exhibition, were approached for the gift or loan of artefacts, and most of them responded generously. (Click here to see the gifts from various donors to the National Museum).

On August 15, 1949, the National Museum, New Delhi, was inaugurated in the Rashtrapati Bhawan by Shri R.C. Rajagopalachari, the Governor-General of India. The foundation of the present building was laid by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, the Prime Minister of India, on May 12, 1955. The first phase of the National Museumbuilding was formally inaugurated by Dr. SarvepalliRadhakrishnan, the Vice President of India, on December 18, 1960. The second phase of the building was completed in 1989.

While the Museum continued to grow its collection through gifts that were sought painstakingly, artefacts were collected through its Arts Purchase Committee. The Museum presently holds approximately 2,00,000 objects of diverse nature, both Indian as well as foreign, and its holdings cover a time span of more than five thousand years of Indian cultural heritage.

The National Museum was initially looked after by the Director General of Archaeology until 1957, when the Ministry of Education, Government of India, declared it a separate institution and placed it under its own direct control. At present, the National Museum is under the administrative control of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India.


1.Dancing girl of Harappa:   Dancing Girl is a prehistoric bronze sculpture made in lost-wax casting about c. 2300–1750 BC in the Indus Valley civilisation city of Mohenjo-daro (in modern-day Pakistan), which was one of the earliest cities. The statue is 10.5 centimetres (4.1 in) tall, and depicts a nude young woman or girl with stylized ornaments, standing in a confident, naturalistic pose. Dancing Girl is highly regarded as a work of art.

The statue was excavated by British archaeologist Ernest Mackay in the "HR area" of Mohenjo-daro in 1926, It is now in the National Museum, New Delhi; having been allocated to India at the Partition of India in 1947.
      
           Description: This is one of two bronze figures found at Mohenjo-daro that show more flexible features when compared to other more formal poses. The girl is nude, wears a number of bangles and a necklace and is shown in a natural standing position with one hand on her hip.She wears 24 to 25 bangles on her left arm and 4 bangles on her right arm, and some object was held in her left hand, which is resting on her thigh; both arms are unusually long. Her necklace has three big pendants. She has her long hair styled in a big bun that is resting on her shoulder.

2.Relics of Buddha:    The national museum at Delhi is home to the biggest collection of miniature paintings. A full gallery is devoted to these paintings and it would take you some time to go through all of them. You can see miniature paintings from various schools of miniature paintings like – Mughal Miniatures, Rajasthan Miniatures, Pahadi Miniatures and Deccani Miniatures.

3.Nataraja in Chola bronze:    The Chola bronze artefacts are more from Tamil Nadu side and are stored in Egmore Museum in Chennai and at Maratha Palace in Thanjavur. Especially relevant is the fact that the  National museum  is home to the Nataraja in chola bronze. Apart from that you can even have a look at some of the other bronze artefacts from India though you might have to roam around a bit for that.

Nataraja is a massive yet elegant statue represents Shiva, passionately engaged in ecstatic dance. This form of Shiva’s image is known as Nataraja in iconographic tradition, and the dance, as ‘Ananda-tandava.’

Perfected anatomical proportions and distinct features define the image of the great Lord. The sculpture was cast in bronze and anodized in deep copper tint, and it represents Shiva as the Lord of Dance.

It combines in a single image the great Hindu god Shiva’s roles as creator, preserver, and destroyer of the universe and conveys the concept of the never-ending cycle of time.

Shiva has many guises and many representations in art, but the most popular is as a dancing figure within the arch of flames, called Shiva Nataraja, Lord of the Dance. 

Nataraja is a depiction of the Hindu god Shiva as the cosmic ecstatic dancer. The pose and artwork are described in many Hindu texts, and the dance relief is featured in major Hindu temples of Shaivism.

It is an image seen in museums and temples across the world, and it is rich in iconography and hidden meaning.

Shiva’s dance is set within a flaming circle of fire. The god holds in his upper right hand, the act of creation, the hand drum that made the first sounds of creation.

His top left-hand holds the fire that will destroy the universe, representing the act of destruction. With his lower right hand, the action of protection, he makes the gesture that diminishes fear.

The figure being trampled by his right foot represents the illusion, which leads humanity astray. Shiva’s front left hand, pointing to his raised left foot, signifies refuge and release for the troubled soul.

The energy of his dance makes his hair fly to the sides.

Just like the art of medieval Europe, the art of India was devoted to the service of religion. The spiritual experience was enhanced by meditating on works of art.

This elegant bronze statue of Shiva in its original Temple location would have awed and inspired a Hindu devotee.

The three gods of the Hindu trinity are Brahma the Creator, Vishnu the Preserver, and Siva the Destroyer and Restorer.

The Tamil sculptors of the Chola dynasty (880–1279) realized Shiva, the Dancer in his most complete and graphic form and one which has become symbolic of Indian civilization.

Siva, as represented in this vital work of art, is perfectly poised and depicts Siva’s grace and majesty.

4.Ganjifa cards:   To all those who are fond of playing cards the Ganjifa cards are actually how are ancestors played the game. In those ages the cards were hand crafted and painted. Some of them are kept in the Decorative arts gallery there are a few which are stored with the miniature paintings.

Ganjifa cards are circular or rectangular,and traditionally hand-painted by artisans. The game became popular at the Mughal court, and lavish sets were made, from materials such as precious stone-inlaid ivory or tortoise shell (darbar kalam). The game later spread to the general public, whereupon cheaper sets (bazar kalam) would be made from materials such as wood, palm leaf, stiffened cloth or pasteboard. Typically Ganjifa cards have coloured backgrounds, with each suit having a different colour. Different types exist, and the designs, number of suits, and physical size of the cards can vary considerably. With the exception of Mamluk Kanjifa and the Chads of Mysore, each suit contains ten pip cards and two court cards, the king and the vizier or minister. The backs of the cards are typically a uniform colour, without patterning.


5.Ivory sculptures:    These sculptures are only few as the art was banned as it involved the killing of elephants. In any case  the National Museum is still home to some of such brilliant pieces. The decorative arts gallery is the place where all the miniature and giant items of ivory are kept.

The Ivory sculptors are limited in availability. The ivory trade was banned and the art form has more or less died. Thankfully, museums like this have a great collection of absolutely exquisite ivory items. In the Decorative Arts gallery, you can see miniature to giant items made of ivory. Some of my favorite pieces include

Dashavatar in Ivory – painted and sculpted
Ivory carved box
A home shrine made of carved ivory
Each piece appears extremely delicate – as if it will break if we touch it. However, they have been enduring for a long time. When you go there, tell me which one you like the most.

6.Alamkara collection Jwellery:    If you are also fond of the shining gold then there are multiple jewelry pieces available. There are nearly 250 pieces on display and each one is a sight to behold.
Alamkara is adornment and a body devoid of adornment is imperfect. But once decorated with beautiful ornaments, the body assumes form, becomes visible, attractive and perfect. National Museum has the most extensive collection of jewellery in India. The items on view here tell the story of Indian jewellery. From the beautifully tumbled agate bead necklaces of Mohenjodaro and Harappa, fabulous jewels adorned with images of gods and goddesses to the magnificent items that once reposed in the treasuries of the Mughal emperors and the maharajas, the collection spans important periods in Indian history. 


7.Tanjore paintings:   On the opposite, this is a relatively new gallery at the National Museum but it is just awesome. Depicting mythological stories these paintings come from Thanjavur and Mysore in South India. Some of the most interesting ones are the ones showing the marriage of Ram – Sita and Siva –Parvati.

This is a relatively new gallery but what a gallery. You see the opulent and colorful paintings from Thanjavur and Mysore in South India. Shiva and mythology are the main subjects of these paintings. Shiva as Nataraja and Krishna as butter-stealing babies are the most common themes seen in Tanjore Paintings. My favorite in this gallery is the painting that shows the two celebrated marriages from Ancient Indian literature – Shiva-Parvati Wedding and Ram-Sita Wedding. I have never seen another painting depicting this.

Another favorite is a single painting depicting the Shiv-Lila – with Nataraja on its top.
There are other unusual paintings like those of Vithobha or Panch-Mukhi Hanuman.


8.Wood carved doors:    Amidst the stone sculptures in the sculpture gallery you find a unique carved wooden door. Created in 14th CE this door is now showing signs of wear and tear.

The Wood Carving Gallery of the museum not only exhibits artefacts from India, but also from Nepal, Central India and Tibet. This gallery gives glimpses of India's wood carving tradition mainly belonging from 17th to 19th centuries illustrating the different styles of wood carvings from Rajasthan, Gujarat, Odisha and South India. Collections on display include decorative and utilitarian objects, architectural elements and sculptures. A square pillar with a capital of five feet height dated 9th century is the earliest wood carving specimen in National Museum. The gallery has been curated by  Anamika Pathak.

9. Miniature Paintings:   The Museum has the biggest collection of miniature paintings from across the country. The size of the miniature gallery and the number of paintings on display an indication of the same. The gallery is not very well organized either in the styles of paintings or themes. However, take my word, each of the miniature paintings here is a masterpiece.

Look for this miniature scroll-like painting that has the sacred map of Varanasi. I also like the self-portraits of some of the famous miniature painters next to the display that shows the tools and techniques of miniature paintings. Jain Mandalas look like complex mathematical equation.
The miniature painting gallery at the National Museum Delhi is the best place to admire and appreciate this art form. You can see miniature paintings from various schools of miniature paintings like – Mughal Miniatures, Rajasthani Miniatures, Pahadi Miniatures, and Deccani Miniatures. It is fun to see the subjects of these paintings that primarily focus on mythological themes and royal scenes. At times, they also document everyday life.

The creative use of small spaces to depict a lot is what we learn from these paintings. For example, a painting depicts 10 Sikh Gurus in the petals of a lotus flower.

                                        NATIONAL MUSEUM OF INDIA NEW DELHI - ARTIFACTS


1) Dancing girl

This figure is a remarkable achievement of the artists of this ancient culture. From this masterpiece we know that the Harappans were skilled in metallurgy and knew how to cast alloys of metals using the lost wax process. This image of a young woman; large eyes, flat nose and bunched curly hair are all featured in an artistic way.

The tilted head and flexed knees and bent right arm dramatically resting on her hip and the other hand holding a bowl suggests a dancing pose. The heavy armlets and the forearm ringed with bangles match her heavy neck ornament. Though the sculpture is only 6 inches tall, it is a work of art, as the artist has captured the youthful charm of the dancer and at the same time evoked many mysterious qualities, leaving us to wonder - who she was, and what was her position in society?

Dancing Girl (Mohenjo-daro) from the Indus Valley Civilization

Dancing Girl, Mohenjo-Daro – Art from the Indus Valley Civilization
The Dancing Girl is a bronze statuette created over 4,500 years ago and is a rare and unique masterpiece. It was found in the ancient Mohenjo-Daro site in 1926.

This statue is a cultural artifact reflecting the aesthetics of a female body as conceptualized during that historical period.

The bronze girl was made using the lost-wax casting technique and shows the expertise of the people in making bronze works during that time.

The statuette was named “Dancing Girl” based on an assumption of her profession. She is one of two bronze artworks found at Mohenjo-Daro that shows a more natural pose than compared to other more formal figures.

The statuette has large eyes, a flat nose, healthy cheeks, curly hair, and a broad forehead. She is a tall figure with long legs and arms, high neck, subdued belly, and sensuously modeled.

The girl wears some bangles and a necklace. She has 25 bracelets on her left arm and four bangles on her right arm and is holding an object in her left hand. Her long hair styled as big bun rested on her shoulder.

Archaeologists regard the Dancing Girl as:

“the most captivating piece of art from an Indus site.”

The statue led to two important discoveries about “The Indus Valley Civilization,” also known as the “Harappan Civilization.”

Firstly that they knew metal blending, casting, and other sophisticated metallic methods; secondly, that entertainment, especially dance, was an essential part of their culture.

Dancing Girl Mohenjo-daro

Excavated ruins of Mohenjo-Daro, with the Great Bath in the foreground and the Buddhist Stupa in the background

Mohenjo-Daro
Mohenjo-Daro, meaning ‘Mound of the Dead Men’, is an archaeological site in the province of Sindh, Pakistan. Built around 2500 BCE, it was one of the largest settlements of the ancient Indus Valley Civilization.

It is also one of the world’s earliest major cities, contemporaneous with the civilizations of ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, Minoan Crete.

Mohenjo-Daro was abandoned in the 19th century BCE as the Indus Valley Civilization declined, and the site was not rediscovered until the 1920s. Significant excavation has since been conducted at the site of the city.

At its height, the Indus Civilization spanned much of what is now Pakistan and North India. It extended westwards to the Iranian border, south to Gujarat in India and northwards to Bactria.

Its major urban centers were at Harappa, Mohenjo-Daro, Lothal, Kalibangan, Dholavira, and Rakhigarhi. Mohenjo-Daro was the most advanced city of its time, with remarkably sophisticated civil engineering and urban planning.

Dancing Girl (bronze), Mohenjo-Daro
Title:                      Dancing Girl (bronze), Mohenjo-Daro
Year:                      c. 2500 BC
Place of Origin:     Mohenjo-Daro
Material:               Bronze
Dimensions:         10.5 cm × 5 cm (4 1/8 in × 2 in )
Museum:              National Museum, New Delhi

2) The Pashupathi Seal

The Pashupati seal is a steatite seal which was uncovered in the 1928–29 Archaeological Survey of India excavations of the Indus Valley civilisation ("IVC") site of Mohenjo-daro, then in the British Raj, and now in Pakistan. The seal depicts a seated figure that is possibly tricephalic (having three heads). The seated figure has been thought to be ithyphallic (having an erect penis), an interpretation that has been questioned by many,but was still held by the IVC specialist Jonathan Mark Kenoyer in a publication of 2003.The man has a horned headdress and is surrounded by animals. He may represent a horned deity.

It has one of the more complicated designs in the thousands of seals found from the Indus Valley civilization, and is unusual in having a human figure as the main and largest element; in most seals this is an animal.It had been claimed to be one of the earliest depictions of the Hindu god Shiva—"Pashupati" (Lord of animals) being one of his epithets, or a "proto-Shiva" deity.

Though the combination of elements in the Pashupati seal is unique, there are a group of other Indus seals that have some of them. One, also from Mohenjo-daro (find number DK 12050) and now in Islamabad, has a nude three-faced horned deity seated on a throne in a yogic position, wearing bangles on its arms. In this case no animals are depicted, and there is some dispute as to the gender of the figure, despite it seeming to have a beard.

The Pashupati seal is in the National Museum, New Delhi, having been moved there with the other Mohenjo-daro finds before independence. These were reserved for the future national museum, finally founded in 1949,and the seal was allocated to India at Partition in 1947.

Discovery and description

A view of the Mohenjo-daro excavation site. The DK-G Area where the seal was found lies north-east of the Great Bath seen in the foreground.The seal was uncovered in 1928–29, in Block 1, Southern Portion of the DK-G Area of Mohenjo-daro, at a depth of 3.9 meters below the surface.Ernest J. H. Mackay, who directed the excavations at Mohenjo-daro, dated the seal to the Intermediate I Period (now considered to fall around 2350–2000 BCE) in his 1937–38 report in which the seal is numbered 420, giving it its alternate name.

The seal is carved in steatite and measures 3.56 cm by 3.53 cm, with a thickness of 0.76 cm. It has a human figure at the centre seated on a platform and facing forward. The legs of the figure are bent at the knees with the heels touching and the toes pointing downwards. The arms extend outwards and rest lightly on the knees, with the thumbs facing away from the body. Eight small and three large bangles cover the arms. The chest is covered with what appear to be necklaces, and a double band wraps around the waist. The figure wears a tall and elaborate headdress with a central fan-shaped structure flanked by two large striated horns. The human figure is surrounded by four wild animals: an elephant and a tiger to its one side, and a water buffalo (bubalus arnee) and an Indian rhinoceros on the other. Under the dais are two deer or ibexes looking backwards, so that their curved horns almost meet in the centre. At the top of the seal are seven Indus script symbols, with the last apparently displaced downwards for lack of horizontal space.

Post-excavation history

An impression made from the steatite seal
The finds from Mohenjo-daro were initially deposited in the Lahore Museum, but later moved to the ASI headquarters at New Delhi, where a new "Central Imperial Museum" was being planned for the new capital of the British Raj, in which at least a selection would be displayed. It became apparent that Indian independence was approaching, but the Partition of India was not anticipated until late in the process. The new Pakistani authorities requested the return of the Harappan pieces excavated on their territory, but the Indian authorities refused. Eventually an agreement was reached, whereby the finds, totalling some 12,000 objects (most sherds of pottery), were split equally between the countries; in some cases this was taken very literally, with some necklaces and girdles having their beads separated into two piles. In the case of the "two most celebrated sculpted figures", Pakistan asked for and received the so-called Priest-King figure, while India retained the much smaller Dancing Girl,and also the Pashupati seal.
Interpretations

Marshall's identification with proto-Shiva
The first description and analysis of the seal's iconography was that of the archaeologist John Marshall who had served as the Director-General of the Archaeological Survey of India and led the excavations of the Indus Valley sites. In addition to the general features of the seal described above, he also saw the central figure as a male deity; as three-faced, with a possible fourth face towards the back; and, as ithyphallic, while conceding that what appeared to be the exposed phallus could instead be a tassel hanging from the waistband. Most significantly he identified the seal as an early prototype of the Hindu god Shiva (or, his Vedic predecessor, Rudra), who also was known by the title Pashupati ('lord or father of all the animals') in historic times.In a 1928–29 publication, Marshall summarized his reasons for the identification as follows:

My reasons for the identification are four. In the first place the figure has three faces and that Siva was portrayed with three as well as with more usual five faces, there are abundant examples to prove. Secondly, the head is crowned with the horns of a bull and the trisula are characteristic emblems of Siva. Thirdly, the figure is in a typical yoga attitude, and Siva [sic] was and still is, regarded as a mahayogi—the prince of Yogis. Fourthly, he is surrounded by animals, and Siva is par excellence the "Lord of Animals" (Pasupati)—of the wild animals of the jungle, according to the Vedic meaning of the word pashu, no less than that of domesticated cattle.

Later, in 1931, he expanded his reasons to include the fact that Shiva is associated with the phallus in the form of linga, and that in medieval art he is shown with deer or ibexes, as are seen below the throne on the seal.Marshall's analysis of the Indus Valley religion, and the Pashupati seal in particular, was very influential and widely accepted for at least the next two generations. Herbert Sullivan, who had significant disagreements with it, recognised in 1964 that Marshall's analysis "has been accepted almost universally and has greatly influenced scholarly understanding of the historical development of Hinduism".

Writing in 1976, Doris Srinivasan introduced an article otherwise critical of Marshall's interpretation by observing that "no matter what position is taken regarding the seal's iconography, it is always prefaced by Marshall's interpretation. On balance the proto-Śiva character of the seal has been accepted." Thomas McEvilley noted, in line with Marshall, that the central figure was in the yoga pose Mulabandhasana, quoting the Kalpa Sutra's description "a squatting position with joined heels" used with meditation and fasting to attain infinite knowledge (kevala).

Alf Hiltebeitel noted in 2011 that, following Marshall's analysis, "nearly all efforts at interpreting the [Indus Valley] religion have centered discussion around [the Pashupati seal] figure".A lot of discussion has taken place about this seal.While Marshall's work has earned some support, many critics and even supporters have raised several objections.

Herbert Sullivan interpreted the figure as a female goddess on the grounds that the so-called erect phallus actually represents the dangling end of a waistband or girdle, a feature found on many undoubtedly female terracotta figurines, and ambiguous on some other seals, including DK 12050 (mentioned above). Marshall himself had admitted this was possible. In the terracottas, males are always nude; in addition, the jewellery worn on the Pashupati seal is characteristic of female rather than male terracottas.

3)3) Seated male in namaskar pose

M.S.Vats found this cream colour hand modelled male nude figurine through the excavation at Harappa. The seated male is in yogic posture with legs outstretched and knees slightly raised. The head and folded hands are in namaskar mudra. Some parts of feet are missing. The head, mouth and nose is pinched and the two eyes are marked by round pellet. Fingers are not shown in hands. The figurine is thin and flat but the triangular forehead is pinched at two sides. The facial expression of this figure is not clear. The well preserved long arms of this squatting male reveals clasped hand in devotional or yogic pose. This type of yogic pose in male figures is rarely found in Indian art. The Harappan terracotta figurines lack the traditional embellishment of costume, ornaments and headdress but its facial features were modelled in the crude handmade Harappan style.

Details

Title: Seated male in namaskar pose
Creator: Unknown
Date Created: 2700 BC - 2100 BC
Location: Sindh, Pakistan
Physical Dimensions: w40 x h50 x d20 cm (WIthout cover)
Type: Statue
Rights: National Museum, Janpath, New Delhi
Style: Indus Art
Place Part Of: Pakistan

4) Siva Nataraja

Description: This poised sculpture of Nataraja belongs to the medieval era and originated in South India under the patronage of the Chola Dynasty in 12th century CE. 
It is 96.0 cm tall, 82.8 cm wide and 28.2 cm in depth. It is currently on display at the National Museum, New Delhi in the gallery of Chola Bronzes.

Historical Significance :- Archeometric, iconographic and literary evidence shows that the bronze representations of Shiva’s Ananda Tandava first appeared in the Pallava period between 7th century CE and mid 9th century CE. Pallava productions of the Nataraja in bronze were borrowed heavily from the Nataraja wooden sculptures. The later Chola craftsmen began experimenting with the greater tensile strength of metal and thus, began to produce figures that were flared and dynamic as opposed to the Pallava sculptures that were close-set and linear. This Nataraja can hence be dated to the era of the Chola Dynasty. Tanjavur or Tanjai was the capital of the imperial Cholas, both in the political and ceremonial sense. Further, the physical and symbolic centre of the capital was a temple dedicated to Shiva, built during the reign of Rajaraja Chola I. The temple was associated very closely with the royals. It was named ‘Rajarajeshvara Temple’ after the incumbent king. As the family and state deity, Shiva was the most important authority in the religious, political, and cultural world of the Cholas and their subjects. Although Shiva was depicted in many divine roles, it was the Shiva Nataraja which became a symbol of Chola power. This sculpture would be clothed and ornamented, it played a significant role in the various temple rituals. Many Shiva temples in southern India have a separate Natana Sabha where the image of Nataraja would have been placed.
Cultural Significance :- The Chola period is well known for its metal sculptures. It is known for the high standard of aesthetic and technical skill achieved by the craftsmen during this period. Metal sculptures both in the South and North India were made using the 'Lost-Wax' process. While South India produced solid sculptures, North India produced hollow ones. Most metal sculptures produced in the South were made of an alloy of five metals - copper, silver, gold, tin, and lead. Within the literature of Shaivite iconography, the dancing Shiva was depicted as either angry or calm. In either example, his cosmic dance would signify the cyclical creation and destruction of the universe. He is usually depicted with four arms carrying a Danda (staff), Gaja (an elephant symbol), a flame which signifies destruction and its counterpart, the Damru (drum), which signifies creation. His front right hand is in the Abhaya Mudra. He is shown wearing a snake ornament and dancing on Muyalaka the dwarf who signifies ignorance and evil.

Artistic Significance :- Nataraja is regarded as the 'Lord of Dance' and his dance is a manifestation of his panchkrityas or the five activities of Shiva that are creation, preservation, destruction, veiling and grace. On the forearm of his right hand is placed a bhujanga-valaya which is a bracelet shaped like a coiled snake. The left leg of Nataraja is raised diagonally towards the right one with its foot up in the air denoting the path of salvation. The image of Shiva is encircled in a prabhamandala, that is the circle of fire. Adorning the head of the lord is a crown of coiled hair (jatamukuta), embellished with the river Goddess Ganga, a snake, jewels, flowers, a crescent moon, and a human skull. Several jatas emerge from the crown on either side spreading horizontally, touching the prabhamandala. Shiva is adorned with a pearl necklace, a yajnopavita that is a sacred thread, urassutra (a chest band), rings, anklets, and a Makara-kundala in the right ear and Patra-kundala on his left ear. The former refers to an earring shaped like a Makara that is a mythical fish-like creature, while the latter refers to earrings shaped as coconut or palmyra leaves.
Spiritual Significance :- Between the Pennar and Kaveri rivers, lies the temple city of Chidambaram, the key religious site associated with Nataraja, the 'Lord of Dance'. The Cholas believed Chidambaram was the earthly home of Shiva and the sacred place where he performed the 'dance of bliss' (Ananda Tandava). The central religious story behind Nataraja takes place in the Tillai forest of Chidambaram, described in the songs of seventh-century poet-saints as the setting for a variety of divine and demonic activities. Shiva came to the forest in the form of Bhikshatana, a wandering beggar to trick and humiliate the sages who neglected proper worship. In the battle that ensues, the sages send creatures such as a demon and a snake, to attack him. Shiva dramatically defeats these malevolent forces and performs his victorious 'dance of bliss.'

5)Standing Buddha-Gandhara Art

The Gandhara art of the Peshawar Valley is known for some of the most charming and magnificent sculptures in dark grey schist. The present sculpture is typically Gandhara in style-marked by long flowing drapery placed loosely on the body with heavy schematic folds. The right hand, which is largely lost, was in abhaya mudra, a typical feature of the standing images of Buddha. He is holding the hem of the Sanghti in his left hand. With abhaya mudra he assures his devotees of ultimate salvation. And, thus, Lord Buddha attained the status as the saviour of mankind.The serene and magnificent Buddha sculpture made of Black schist stone is one of the masterpieces of the Gandhara art at the National Museum, New Delhi. It belongs to the Kushana Dynasty and dates back to 2nd century CE (as per the National Museum Publication) / 5th century CE (as per the caption inside the museum). The sculpture is 112cm in height, 39 cm in width and 17 cm deep. It is currently on display in the Kushana- Ishkvaku Gallery in the National Museum. 

Details

Title: Standing Buddha-Gandhara Art
Date Created: 200 AD - 300 AD
Location: New Delhi, National Museum
Location Created: Gandhara Region, India
Physical Dimensions: w390 x h1120 x d170 cm (without cover)
Subject Keywords: Gandhara, National Museum, Sculpture
Type: Statue, Sculpture
Rights: National Museum, Janpath, New Delhi
Art Genre: Sculpture
Style: Arts
Place Part Of: National Museum
Accession Number: National Museum ID 49.24


6)The Ashokan edicts 

 The Ashokan edicts in Delhi are a series of edicts on the teachings of Buddha created by Ashoka, the Mauryan Emperor who ruled in the Indian subcontinent during the 3rd century BC. The Edicts of Ashoka were either carved on in-situ rocks or engraved on pillars erected throughout the empire; examples of both are found in Delhi.

The first in-situ rock edict was discovered in Delhi in 1966, and establishes the city's ancient historical link with the Ashokan era (273–236 BC). Delhi's stone pillar edicts were transported from their original sites in Meerut and Ambala during the reign of Firuz Shah Tughlaq (1351–1388 AD). They were erected in Feruzabad, the fourth medieval city of Delhi, established by Feroz Shah Tughlaq.

The inscriptions are written in Prakrit, a colloquial language used in everyday speech. The edicts were intended to teach the people of the morals and ideals of civilised living, to bring peace and harmony to the vast empire. The philosophy bears a striking resemblance to the teachings of the Buddha, which his followers believe lead to enlightenment (the universal law of nature), and the constituent elements of the world as it is experienced (the characteristic of elements).

History

Until the 3rd century BC, a large region of the Indian subcontinent was ruled by Chandragupta Maurya (322–298 BC), founder of Mauryan Empire. He was the grandfather of Ashoka. Ashoka's father Bindusara ruled from 297–272 BC. Ashoka, known as Ashoka the Great, after he took over reigns of the Mauryan Empire from his father then expanded and consolidated his grandfather's region into a much larger empire with command over large swathes of the Indian subcontinent and with his capital at Pataliputra, the present day Patna in Bihar.Ashoka ruled for three decades. During his reign, he underwent a dramatic change in his life-style after winning the Kalinga War of 261 BC, at the cost of immense loss of life. As one of his edict inscriptions states: "150,000 people were forcibly abducted from their homes, 100,000 were killed in battle, and many more died later on".This event had a profound impact upon him. He was repentant. He then decided to renounce further warfare. He then converted to Buddhist religion, as the ethos of Buddhism (teachings of Buddha, an awakened teacher who shared his insights to help sentient beings end suffering (or dukkha), achieve nirvana, and escape what is seen as a cycle of suffering and rebirth} appealed to him. His 13th edict is a form of self indictment: "Even a hundredth or a thousandth part only of the people who were slain, or killed or abducted in Kalinga is now considered as a grievous loss by Devanmpiya, beloved of the Gods, i.e., Ashoka".

He avowed that his future actions would entirely be on spiritual lines and devoted to the spread of the doctrine of the right conduct. Two years after the Kalinga war, as a primary member of the Buddhist faith, for 265 days, he undertook a nationwide pilgrimage of holy places of Buddhist religion. On his return to Pataliputra, his capital, in 258 BC, after a grand celebration, he launched his missionary campaign throughout his empire and even spread to South India and Sri Lanka. Ashoka's son Mahindra was involved in this mission. In 257 BC, he got the first four of his 14 rock edicts inscribed in different parts of his empire. Out of the fourteen rock edicts, one rock edict has been discovered in Delhi, though not in a complete form.

While edicts inscribed on rocks were found in many parts of the world, erection of carved pillars was unique to Ashokan times, totally independent of any other structures.[1

Edicts

Ashokan edicts are significant for the message they convey on the teachings of Buddhism. They have been found across his empire, written in several languages and scripts, but most of those found in India are written in Prakrit, using the Brahmi script. To spread the message in the north-western of the empire, edicts were written in Kharoshti script. Bilingual and bi-scriptural edicts have also been discovered in Kandahar and Afghanistan, written in Greek and Aramaic. Ashokan edicts written on rocks or pillars are considered unique and permanent as compared to the palm leaf or bark writings (perishable materials) of the past during the Harappan civilization, or even early Mauryan Empire edicts. The Brahmi script was not deciphered until 1837, by James Prinsep, an Indian antiquarian. The edicts of Ashoka deal with codes of conduct in respect of moral and religious views, as his personal messages.

7)Mughal Emperor Shahjahan in the Marriage Procession his Eldest Son Dara Shikoh


Although the painting depicts the occasion of the marriage procession of Dara Shikoh, the beloved though ill-fated son of the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan, the painting was made almost a century after the event. Reminiscing about the magnificence of the Empire during its zenith, the painters in an era of a fading Mughal Empire copied many paintings of the erstwhile ‘high’ period. This painting is also a copy of a now lost painting, probably from a dispersed Padshahnama, a chronicle of the life and times of the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan.

The copy however betrays the style of the painters as schooled in the idioms and exposed to new ideas of rendering space and perspective current around the mid eighteenth century. Space in the painting is unfolded in a tilted foreground and the background and deeper space and distant figures emerge in planes parallel to the surface of the painting.

Dara Shikoh is depicted at the center of the painting mounted on a richly caparisoned horse, with a veil of pearls (sehra) covering his face, customarily worn by a bridegroom. His steed similarly wears the sehra. A bejewelled turban draped in strands of pearls and a large plume covers his head. Dara Shikoh holds the reins with one hand, and with the other, a handkerchief. His father the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan rides next to him, distinguished by a pale blue and gold halo that encircles his head. Following them is a procession of nobles who ride on horses.

The riders are accompanied by a crowd of men that carry lighted candles sticks in large glass jars, on tall bifurcated staffs with candles mounted on either ends, or as single flaming ones.

Others in the crowd play musical instruments, sing, dance or simply pray. On the top left, four elephants carry female musicians and the drummers who beat the large naubats on the happy occasion. On the top right, in the far distance a magnificent blaze of firework display takes place, with streamers, barrages, Roman candles, and rockets lighting up the pitch-black sky with gold, and clouds of smoke softly wafting downwards.

The artist exhibits his virtuosity with the play with light and the detail and precision of line in rendering figures and forms.

The hard outlined faces and bodies, a tendency for linearism where the figures are flattened, yet depicted in great detail and the distinct style of rendering fire and light in a more naturalistic fashion are all traits seen in the late Mughal style painting during the mid-eighteenth century.

Details

Title: Mughal Emperor Shahjahan in the Marriage Procession his Eldest Son Dara Shikoh
Date Created: 1740 AD - 1750 AD
Location: Oudh, India
Physical Dimensions: w380 x h585.8 cm (without cover)
Type: Painting
Rights: National Museum, Janpath, New Delhi
Style: Indian Paintings & Art
Place Part Of: India

8)Ajilamo Mask
 
65.429 
20th Century C.E
Arunachal Pradesh, India 
 L. 51.5 cm; Wd 25 cm 

This unique mask is worn by the Sherdukpen community of Arunachal Pradesh during their version of Ajilamo dance. The Lhamo is a folk opera that was originated in the 14th Century by Saint-Scholar Mahasiddha  Thantong  Gyalpo in Tibet. The Lhamo was the celestial figure and the queen of Gyeli. During the annual Losar festival, Monpa and Sherdukpens per this pantomime where they demonstrate the marriage between Lhamo and King Chhoegay Norzang.  In the dramatic rhythm of drums and cymbals, the distinctive foot, hand, and bodily movements depict the qualities of the Achi Lhamo characters.

7) Perak 
86.227
Textile, Fur, Semi-precious stones, Silver
Ladakh, India
19th century C.E
L. 69.5 cm ; Wd 40.5 cm

This ornate headdress known as Perak is particularly worn by the Ladakhi ladies. It denotes their marital status, as only married women are allowed to adorn it. It is believed that the Perak drew its origin from the cowrie studded ceremonial Kupa headdress of Pakistan. Once worn, it creates an appearance that resembles the hood of a King Cobra, signifying the women as the custodian of  the community. According to folklore, it was the Ladakhi queen who first initiated the tradition of wearing a Perak among the womenfolk of the region.

8)Surya, the Sun God
Original Location: Konark, Odisha

Present Location: National Museum, New Delhi

Date: 13th century CE

Period: Medieval

Material: Stone

Objects: Sculpture

Dimensions: H 189.2 x W 89 x D 40.5 cm

This sculpture of Surya, the Sun God was made around the 13th century during the rule of the Eastern Ganga Dynasty. It is now located at the National Museum, New Delhi. The cult of Surya was founded at the site by Narasimha I as part of the Eastern Ganga Dynasty (1238-1264 CE).

The stone sculpture of Surya was once a part of the ‘garbhagriha’ or the sanctum sanctorum of the famous Konark Temple in Orissa. It was later shifted to the National Museum, for its safety and better upkeep. The Eastern Ganga Dynasty went down in history for their creation of the Konark or the Sun temple at Puri which is now also a UNESCO World Heritage Site. This architectural marvel was where the sculpture was placed as the temple itself was dedicated to Surya or the Sun God. King Narasimhadeva I, the great ruler of the Ganga dynasty had built this temple with the help of 1200 artisans within a period of 12 years (1243-1255 CE). Konark Temple was designed in the form of a gorgeously decorated chariot mounted on twenty four wheels, each about ten feet in diameter and drawn by seven mighty horses.

A striking feature of the Sun God is that he is often shown in 'northern' or Scythian dress which is a close-fitting coat with high boots, suggesting an influence from Iranian Sun cults. Surya sculptures begin pouring in from around the early centuries of the Christian era. The dagger-carrying 'udichya vesa' images in tunic, girdle and high boots of this early conception were widely different from his contemporary sculptures. The artisans were well versed with the texts of Hinduism from where the iconography of the God was taken. 


In the words of the great poet Rabindranath Tagore, "here (Konark) the language of stone surpasses the language of man." These words still resonate with everyone who has visited the Konark Temple. The sculpture of Sun God is two-armed but sadly the forearms have been destroyed. We see the iconography of Surya particularly following the texts which mention the Sun God. Here we see that Surya’s forearms holding two full-blown lotuses have been completely destroyed. Two full-blown lotuses are still in their positions above the shoulders of the deity. Surya, has been represented as riding a chariot driven by seven galloping horses with reins in the hands of his charioteer. There are various decorative details on this sculpture depicting the intricacy of style and method of the artists. The face of the deity seems to glow with inner delight and energy with a subtle smile on his lips. This shows the detail with which this sculpture was made. We also find other figures which have become an important part of the portrayal of the sculpture like the 'Maladharas' showering flowers, veena-playing Gandharva, and an equestrian messenger. We also see two female figures as his consorts, Chhaya and Suvarchasa and two males as his trusted attendants, Danda and Pingala. 


Surya was a greatly revered God within the Rig Vedic pantheon. Surya is usually seen driving away the darkness by riding in his chariot across the sky and is sometimes visualized as a white horse or an eagle. A Rig Vedic deity alternating with Vishnu, Surya, the source of light, warmth and life, stood for time and cosmic dynamics. There are ten hymns in praise of Surya in the Rig Veda. He is known by many alternative names and epithets which include Vivasvat (brilliant), Savitr (the nourisher), Bhaskara (light-maker), Dinakara (day-maker), Lokacaksuh (Eye of the World), Graharaja (King of the Constellations), and Sahasra-kirana (1,000 rays). Vishnu, who later largely replaces Surya’s function in the Hindu pantheon is referred to as Surya Narayana in his incarnation as the sun.


Surya and the Adityas, the collective name for the solar deities were especially popular in the early Vedic period. In the Later Vedic period, Surya was replaced in importance by deities such as Shiva and Vishnu. He is celebrated during the harvest festival of Pongal in southern India. Followers of the God are known as 'Sauryas.' Surya appears in the important Gayatri mantra from the Vedas which is recited on a daily basis and is considered holy by the Hindus. As the cult of worship of the sun was prevalent also in other parts (Greece, Rome, Iran) these early images seem to be influenced by extraneous elements, especially Iranian. Later sculptures are more Indianised.



9)Indore Coin
55.36/132
Indore, India
1886-1903 C.E
The coin was issued by Shivajii Rao of the Holkar dynasty, the twelfth Maharaja of Indore. Holkar was a Maratha clan of Dhangar origin in India. Malhar Rao Holkar was the founder of Holkar dynasty. Shivaji Rao Holkar was the twelfth Maharaja of Holkar dynasty of Marathas. He succeeded his father on 17th June 1886 and ruled till 1903 C.E. During his reign he issued silver and copper coins in the denomination of Rupee, paisa and Anna series. All the coins struck at Indore mint represented various symbols such as sun face, bull, etc.

10)Battle axe of Nadirshah

This personal battle axe belongs to Nadir Shah who invaded India and massacred Delhi in A.D. 1739. It is inscribed with verses from the holy Quran, Nadir Shah’s name and the title Sahib-i-Qiran. There are only three Sahib-i-Qirans in Mughal history namely Timur, Shah Jahan and Nadir-Shah. The inscription engraved in high relief on both sides of the blade and upon the socket in Persian language and Nastaliq script in gold plated. The octagonal handle is damascened in gold in floral and creeper design in teh-nishan style all over.                                                                          
The battle-axe of Nadir Shah is a noteworthy specimen. It is inscribed with Quranic verses and ‘SahibeQiran Nadir’ in Arabic. The axe head is profusely decorated with gold and silver inscriptions. The octagonal handle is profusely decorated with floral designs in gold and silver.

Details

Title: Inscribed battle-axe of Nadirshah
Date Created: 1739 AD
Location: Delhi, India
Physical Dimensions: h520 cm (WIthout cover)
Type: Arms & Armour
Rights: National Museum, Janpath, New Delhi
Style: Indian Arms & Armor Art
Place Part Of: India
58.47/3
Metal
Indo- Persian, 
1739 C.E
Lt. 52 cm

11) Jade Hilt
    A Mughal style curved handle of a dagger in jade with lower portion mounted with silver plated steel. It is decorated with floral design. The stone/enamel inlay is missing.This jade hilt is carved into a shape of a parrot’s head complete with beak and eyes. It is studded with red, white and green semi-precious stones. The wings of the parrot are highlighted with inlaid gold wires. Hilts were often delicately fashioned, thickly overlaid with gold plates or damascened in gold and silver wires. Fixing the hilt, the tang of the sword was inserted into the hollow part of the hilt and glued. Hilt is a definite landmark in allocating the place of origin and date to a sword or a dagger and also in its classification.The jade hilt, probably part of a dagger,is studded with diamonds and rubies in gold border, designed as floral stems. The daggers with such carved jade hilts were worn and exchanged as gifts among the royal and noblemen within the Mughal empire and its neighbouring courts.

Type: Arms and Armour  

12) Helmet
Alternative Title: Khud

Description: A casted, riveted, Mughal style Helmet (khud) in a fluted pattern surmounted with plume holders. The two plume holders in front have a movable nasal guard with terminals. The surface is damascened in gold in floral motifs. The camail of interlinked chain mails is attached to the edges for the protection of neck and the shoulders.The hemispherical helmet made of four pieces of steel soldered. It is surmounted by a plume-holder and a movable nasal-guard with leaf-shaped terminals. The entire helmet is profusely inlaid with gold in creeper, birds and geometrical patterns in zar-band. Arabic characters are encased in ornamental frames arranged at two levels upper and lower. The helmet also consists of a camail for the protection of shoulder and neck.

Type: Arms and Armour
96.216
Steel, gold,
Hyderabad, 
19th Century C.E
Ht.52 cm, Dia. 20.7 cm

13)Flying Celestial

Description: A relief panel depicting on its proper right two large flying figures, male and female, and on the proper left in a small rectangular niche a standing couple. The male flying figure on the extreme right has his hair dressed in the formal curls and wears a tiara. He wears a lower garment and a sash at the waist, a beaded necklace, armlets and bangles. The female also wears a waistcloth and in the left hand, she holds one of the flying tassels of a sash attached to her left hip. Her hair is tied at the back and she wears ear-rings, anklets, a necklace, armlets and bangles, as also a tiara on the head. Above the niche is a human face. The panel is damaged at several places and a large piece is missing from the lower right corner. Yellowish buff sandstone.

In the Deccan, over one hundred temples were built during the 7th and 8th Century within the Early Western Chalukyan Empire (10th to 12th Century C.E.). Few of these temples are Jain in affiliation and the rest Hindu, and reflect the religious leanings of different emperors. This is a large slab carved in high relief showing a flying celestial couple. They are lightly floating amidst clouds. The female figure holds a fruit in her right hand in front of the chest and the left arm rests on the shoulder of the male figure.

This panel is one of the rare Chalukyan temple ceilings in the collection of National Museum. The ceiling slab depicts a flying celestial couple. This graceful representation of the couple shows their legs bent at the knees as if they are flying without the aid of wings. The male figure is clad in a short lower garment and the female is draped in a sari. The soft fluttering garments and depiction of clouds suggest skyward movement of the divine couple.

Details

Title: Flying celestials
Date: 600/700
Location: Early Western Chalukya Aihole, Mysore, Karnataka
Physical Dimensions: Sandstone, 135.0 x 109.0 x 23.0 cm
Accession Number: L.55.22
Type: Archaeology

14) Diadem with emblems of five cosmic Buddha

Diadems such as this one, with five segments bearing images of the five cosmic Buddhas, are worn by Buddhist monks and priests during the performance of certain rituals, especially those involving the initiation of a disciple into a particular set of esoteric teachings. Each Buddha presides over one of the five Buddha Families and makes a particular gesture ("mudra"). As they appear in this crown from left to right, they are: Amitabha (“Infinite Light”), in the gesture of meditation; Vairochana (“Radiant”), with hands in a position that seems to be a variation on the gesture of enlightenment; Akshobhya (“Unshakeable”), in the earth-touching gesture; Ratnasambhava (“Jewel-Born”), in the gesture of bestowal; and Amoghasiddhi (“Unfailing Success”), in the gesture of reassurance. Each Buddha is also associated with a particular color, but the maker of the diadem embroidered them all with the same color of thread, giving them a harmonious appearance. They also sit on nearly identical lotus pedestals and lion thrones, and are framed by the same auspicious vine motif. The five-part form of this diadem has origins in Tibet, but this one was made in China, where Tibetan Buddhist traditions and art forms were also practiced.
This ritualistic diadem plays a prominent role in tantric Buddhist religious ceremonies of Himalayan Buddhist communities. Particularly used as an ensemble in the initiation (abhisheka) ceremony. This crown is embellished with mystic syllables, denoting the five-fold wisdom of the transcendental Buddhas. The following letters are mystical seed syllable (bija) unique to each of the Buddhas - Amitabha (Infinite Light) represented by 'Hri', Akshobhya (Unshakeable), etc. These syllables are embroidered separately on five panels within torana-shaped segments.

Embroidered textile, paper 
20th century C.E
L. 40.5 cm; Wd. 44.5 cm, H. 17.5 cm

15)Balabodhini

Manuscripts Collection
76.726/2
Birch-bark manuscript
12th century C.E.
Sanskrit; Sharada.
28 × 23 cms

Balabodhini, authored by one of the celebrated Kashmiri Pandit, Jagaddhara Bhatta, dates back to 12th century C.E. inscribed on birch-bark (bhuja-patra) in black ink, typical to Kashmir. The inner bark of the common birch, known more as the bhoja-patraorbhurja in their native Himalayan region, has been used most prolifically by the Hindu Kashmiri as their writing material till 18th century. In the manuscript, we do not see any illustrations being used. The text is written in Sharada script, with pen and black ink, imparting a vivid character to the quaint birch-bark.

16) Head Ornament(jhumar)

Description: 
The head ornament (jhumar) with a semi-circular openwork foliate panel with a design of a crescent moon all set with diamonds and green enamel and surmounted with a gold hook. Fourteen rows of pearls interspersed with ruby beads from the bottom are attached to a crescent shaped panel set with diamonds and suspending gem set pieces and bunches of pearls below. The jewel is worn pinned to the hair on one side of the head.

It is a silver head ornament composed of a chainmaille string incorporated with evenly spaced floral motifs, studded with red colour semi-precious stones. It has both the ends attached with decorative jhumkas comprising of spherical shaped units fixed with domical shaped ornaments with hanging bells. These units are decorated with intricate wirework and encrusted with red and blue stones respectively.
Type : Jewellery
89.1030
Gold, diamonds, pearls

17) Temple Chariot

This magnificent five-tier wooden temple chariot dedicated to “Pandanallur shri Adikesavaperumal” (lord Vishnu), advances from the state of Tamil Nadu in Southern part of India. It was crafted in the mid 19th century by “Sri Pasupati Achari” and his son under the guidance of four devotees named “Manikkam Pillai”, “Subbu Pilai”,”Cattaya Pillai” and “Jambu Nath Pillai”. It was prepared using locality available wood Viz. teak, sandal and acacia. Such chariots were primarily used in most temples in South India during festivals (rathothsavas) carrying gracefully decorated idols of  gods and goddeness, and were drawn through street of town and village by hundreds of devotees. Ample reference to such festivities were usually conduct to commemorate foundation of temples, pray for the wellbeing of king, celebrate birthday of chieftains, births of marriage of princes, planetary conjunctions and events associated with astrological significance. Innumerable devotees would come out of their singing and dancing to pay homage to the deities being carried.

18) Pilgrim's Bottle

Description: It is a well-shaped bottle seems like a pilgrim's bottle. Either side of the body of the bottle is decorated with a fully blossomed lotus. The lotus is having two rows of petals and a central part of each lotus is decorated with an applique.One of the well-crafted bottles that the National Museum has in the Central Asian Collection, used by pilgrim’s during their travel through arid deserts of Turfan. Either side of the body of the bottle is decorated with a fully bloomed lotus. The lotus has two rows of petals. Central part of each lotus is decorated with an appliqué grotesque human face. The bottle has a small mouth. Through two ring-like handles, the bottle could be hung easily on the waist for carrying pious water. The site of Yotkan and nearby Khotan has numerous beautiful terracotta objects.Terra-cotta bottle, shaped like pilgrim bottle, with short expanding neck and mouth, small handles tucked under spreading lip, flat base. Each side decorated with fully open lotus occupying whole surface ; two rows of petals with grotesque human head in centre. Bands of herring-bone pattern divide two sides. Surface coated with rich red glossy slip resembling quality of Samian ware. The grotesque is applied and has no slip over it. Very good work. 6” x 4- 3/4” x 3-3/8”. This bottle was procured by Stein from Yotkan gold mine area.Well-shaped bottle seems like a pilgrim’s bottle. Either side of the body of the bottle is decorated with a fully blossomed lotus with two rows of petals. Central part of each lotus is decorated  with an appliqué grotesque human face. The bottle has a small mouth. Through two ring-like handles, the bottle could be hung easily. on the waist  for carrying extremely pious/ religious water. The site of  Yotkan and nearby Khotan has thrown numerous beautiful terracotta objects. This site is located in the Western Chinese Turkistan of  China.

4th – 5th cent.
Height: 16.3 cm
Type: Central Asian Antiquity

19) Coiled Serpent Jar

In Mexican mythology, the snake is a symbol of veneration, worship and honour often a symbol of great power, rebirth and resurrection and a powerful emblem of renewal and transition also. The snake is recognized as a symbol of humanity as a whole. It also provides hope for mankind to aspire to great heights as it correlates the shedding of the serpent’s skin to a human’s ability to change his circumstances and overcome adversity. 
This effigy jar shows a coiled serpent in a very aggressive and  mood. The serpent head is modelled in high relief and the mouth is open and the teeth show its attacking or  pose. The coil begins to shape up from the bottom of the jar and modelled in low relief. The length is shown by reddish-brown and white lines, scales of the body are beautifully depicted in abstract patterns and eyes also indicate its watchfulness. The upper portion is painted in an abstract pattern. It has a yellow and reddish-brown slip.

Type : Pre-Columbian and Western Art Collection
Mexico
1200-1500 C.E.
Terracotta
Size: Ht. 19.6 cm, Dia. 15.5 cm.
Acc. No. 67.421

20) Portable Shrine(Kavad)

Kavad is a portable shrine which contains multiple folding doors, each painted with various themes from the Hindu epics and mythology. It is a folk tradition from the state of Rajasthan, where the Kavadia Bhatt priests commissions the artisans belonging to the Kumawat caste to create these delightful portable shrines. These shrines are generally made of softer wood and paint is applied on a prepared surface. These portable shrines also show the ingenious craftsmanship and engineering, where all the doors are perfectly calibrated to open one after the other as well as provisions of little drawers and small holders on the side to contain certain frequently required items. These doors are opened with the flow of the story, with the priest pointing to the appropriate scenes using a peacock feather. The story ends with the final glimpse of the deities placed in the innermost chamber.The storytellers are called as Bhanwar Bhat.

Type: Anthropology
75.64
Wood, Natural Pigments
Rajasthan, India
20th century C.E
H.35.5 cm; Wd. 22 cm; Depth. 16.5 cm

21) Dasavatara shrine

The Dasavatara shrine is a miniature Hindu shrine displaying the ten incarnations of the Hindu deity Vishnu, carved in ivory and wood. The Dasavatara shrine was made in the late 18th century CE in South India. It is presently displayed in the National Museum, New Delhi.

The term Dashavatara refers to the ten main incarnations of Vishnu, generally displayed together in panels and reliefs.
A magnificent example of ivory carving and painting pursuing typical South Indian idiom, this tiny shrine, full of luster and most rare, both as the art material and the quality of art, installs Lord Vishnu's ten incarnations, each on a circular double lotus seat. The sandal wood base of the shrine is mounted with an ivory sheet and in the background is a perforated ivory screen divided into three parts using European style pillars. 

Description
According to the National Museum's curator, Anamika Pathak, the Dasavatara shrine is decorated with black paint, and the screen and the base of the shrine shows the signature style of craftsmanship of the Mysore school of ivory painting. All the images are fixed on a painted stepped base made of sandalwood. The base, covered completely with ivory sheet, has the traditional South Indian design of flowers, and is decorated with several knobs fixed at the bottom step. Two pillars support the fence in the background on both sides. The backdrop of the shrine is decorated with perforated ivory screen. These lattice work screens are divided into three parts by two small European style columns. An ivory strip on the wooden edges of the steps and base of the shrine depicts a foliage pattern.

Iconography
There are a total of ten images featured in the Dasavatara shrine, standing upon a total of four steps, each depicting an incarnation of Vishnu.
A magnified image of the Dashavatara upon the Dasavatara shrine
The first step features the Matsya avatar. The second step features the Kurma and Varaha avatars. The third step features the Narasimha, Vamana, and Parashurama avatars. The fourth step features the Rama, Balarama, Krishna, and Kalki avatars.

The Matsya, Kurma, Varaha, Narasimha and Kalki images are depicted as four-armed, which conveys the idea of Vishnu's supremacy. All of them hold Vishnu's attributes of the shankha and chakra in their two hands. Their other two hands express the abhayamudra and varadamudra; Kalki is the exception, holding a sword and a shield.

The Vamana, Parshurama, Rama, Balarama, and Krishna images are portrayed as two-armed, and hold different attributes. Vamana holds an umbrella and a kamandalam, while Parashurama carries an axe and a bow. Rama holds a bow-and-arrow, while Balarama carries a mace, his other hand expressing the abhayamudra. Krishna carries a flute and a shankha.

All the incarnations are depicted wearing a dhoti as a lower garment, and are adorned with items of jewellery such as necklaces, bangles, armlets, and the kiritamukuta, a crown worn by Vishnu. Vamana is depicted without a crown.

72.251/(a)
Ivory, wood
South India
Late 18th century CE
Lt. 22; Wd. 17.8; Ht. 15 cms

A magnificent example of ivory carving and painting pursuing typical South Indian idiom, this tiny shrine, full of luster and most rare, both as the art material and the quality of art, installs Lord Vishnu's ten incarnations, each on a circular double lotus seat. The sandal wood base of the shrine is mounted with an ivory sheet and in the background is a perforated ivory screen divided into three parts using European style pillars. 

22) Cooch Behar Coin

It is a machine made silver coin of the Cooch Behar king Shri Shri Jagaddipendra Narayana Bhupa Raja, Saka 413. On the other side, there is a Royal Crest Legend Yatodharmastatojayah Royal.Silver coin of the Cooch Behar king Shri Shri Jitender Narayana Bhupraj, Saka 404. On the other side there is Royal Crest Legend Yatodharmastatojayah. The main currency in circulation was the British currency after 1866 and not the Narayani coins (currency of the Cooch Behar). The obverse show a crowned lion on the left and an elephant on the right and the royal crest having Hanuman on top. The coat of arms has the royal motto in Sanskrit shloka of “Yato Dharmo Stoto Jayah” in Bengali script. The shield has patterns and has two swords in crossed position and a balance. The reverse of the Cooch Behar coins has the name of the king and the date as Raja Saka (Cooch Behar Era) 413 which coincides with 1923 C.E.

Type: Numismatics and Epigraphy
53.23/178
Silver 
India
20th Century C.E

23) Shield of Maharana Sangram Singh II

The “Shield of Maharana Sangram Singh II” belonged to Sangram Singh II (1690 – 1734), who was the ruler of Mewar, India. He reigned from 1710 to 1734.

This historical object is part of the Arms and Armor Gallery of the National Museum, New Delhi.

The shield is made of rhino hide making it robust and able to withstand battle blows; however, it was also light to carry. The shield has an inscription of ownership and depicts various expeditions by the Maharana. 

The rhinoceros hide has been lacquered and painted in lac red, carbon black, and gold. It has been painted like a contemporary Mewar miniature and with as much detail and beauty.

Eight scenes are showing the Maharana on an expedition with his entourage.

The center portrays the Sun God with sun-like rays emitting from it. The Sun God is painted with a trimmed mustache and ‘tri-punda’ mark on the forehead.  

This sun emblem is the Mewar’s insignia. Four etched and gilded knobs with perforated and serrated borders surmounted by green glass pieces.

On the back of the shield, the knobs are riveted to four ring-bolts. A padded cushion and leather straps covered with red velvet are attached to the ring-bolts to allow for the shield to be carried in relative comfort.

Personal shield belongs to Maharana Sangram Singh II of Mewar who ruled from A.D. 1710 to 1734. The inscription reads: Maharano Sangram Singhji in Devanagari above the portrait of the prince. Names of three fief-holders (thikanedars) of Mewar, namely Salumbara, Kanodha and Badanora, are given below. The shield depicts one of the actual hunting expeditions of the Maharana. The dhal or shield is made of rhinoceros hide, lacquered black and painted in brilliant gold in A.D. 1730, in Mewar style of painting identical of the contemporary miniature painting on paper of this school. It is divided into eight sections of wavy shape. The scenes illustrated on it show the Maharana marching with retinue and deer, etc. The last scene shows him returning on the back of an elephant to his palace. Only three] colours, lacquer red, carbon black and gold, have been used to beautify this shield. The central medallion represented sun god rays emanating from a human face. It is also an insignia of Mewar royal family .

Details

Title: Shield of Maharana Sangram Singh II
Date Created: 1730 AD
Location: Udaipur, India
Physical Dimensions: w97 x h625 cm (without cover)
Type: Arms & Armour
Style: Indian Arms & Armor Art
Place Part Of: India
Material:            Rhino hide
Dimensions:       W 97 x H: 625 cm.

24)Animal Faced Pregnant Female

The standing animal faced pregnant female terracotta figure was acquired through excavation from Mohenjodaro. It is well baked and has traces of red chocolate colour slip. Marks of red paint suggest that this figurine was coloured red. The red colour used by Harappan terracotta artist was red haematite. The figure is solid except two holes near the arms and belly. The most notable feature is the breasts of this female figure but these are not shown. Figure does not have any arms but the two holes are marked on its two shoulders which confirm that arms were attached with the shoulder. There is one hole on the back between joints of hips and another below the abdomen. The two thick short legs are closed together. The face of figure is pinched and has elongated looks like face of an animal. The eyes and holes of nostrils are marked by incised method.This strange-looking tiny figurine, a woman's anatomy and an animal's face, represents a woman in advanced days of pregnancy. Armless, except the little parts adjacent to shoulders remaining, the woman's figure has been cast as standing straight with her legs positioned parallel and almost joined. Strangely, she has a muzzle-like elongated animal face, the style of nose in particular. There is a round cavity on the back between joints of hips, below the abdomen. Eyes and nostrils are marked by incision. 

Details

Title: Pregnant animal headed female
Date Created: 2700 BC - 2100 BC
Location: Sindh, Pakistan
Physical Dimensions: w40 x h94 cm (WIthout cover)
Type: Statue
Style: Indus Art
Terracotta
Mohenjo-Daro
C. 2700-2100 B.C.E
9.4 x 4 cm

25) 





                                                                       